---
title: "TADAM: Learning Timed Automata from Noisy Observations"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
venue: "SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM25)"
date: 2025-05-01
location: "Alexandria Virginia, U.S."
---

Timed Automata (TA) are formal models capable of representing regular languages with timing constraints, making them well-suited for modeling systems where behavior is driven by events occurring over time. Most existing work on TA learning relies on active learning, where access to a teacher is assumed to answer membership queries and provide counterexamples. While this framework offers strong theoretical guarantees, it is impractical for many real-world applications where such a teacher is unavailable. In contrast, passive learning approaches aim to infer TA solely from sequences accepted by the target automaton. However, current methods struggle to handle noise in the data, such as symbol omissions, insertions, or permutations, often resulting in excessively large and inaccurate automata. In this paper, we introduce TADAM, a novel approach that leverages the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle to balance model complexity and data fit, allowing it to distinguish between meaningful patterns and noise. We show that TADAM is significantly more robust to noisy data than existing techniques, less prone to overfitting, and produces concise models that can be manually audited. We further demonstrate its practical utility through experiments on real-world tasks, such as network flow classification and anomaly detection. [Slides](https://pfgimenez.fr/files/SDM25.pdf). [Poster](https://pfgimenez.fr/files/SDM25_poster.pdf)
